## Development Time

The overall experience of the Vue CLI (and Webpack by extension) and Vite can be similar during development. Both incrementally build your project and use Dynamic Module Replacement to replace changed code in your continually running project.

The difference between the two boils down to speed. Webpack is building the project from source and continuing to do incremental builds as you are developing your project.

Vite, on the other hand, is loading your actual code into the browser as needed. This means there is less of a need for sourcemaps as the code running in the browser is the actual code (and files) that you’re working with. This means, for the most part, you’ll find Vite to be a more direct development and debugging experience than Vue CLI. Instead of debugging with the code you’re writing, in Vue CLI, you’ll be debugging the code generated by Webpack (by utilizing the sourcemaps).

Another benefit is that Vite isn’t tied to Vue.js. Vite can be used in different environments: plain JavaScript, React, PReact and SvelteKit. So if you’re working in more than one environment, a single tool can be easier to work with (and configure) for different projects.

## Production Time

Rollup is similar to Webpack (and Parcel, another popular bundler) though how they work is a bit different.

Webpack is based on the CommonJS (e.g. cjs) API for managing JavaScript modules. Even though Webpack supports ES Modules, the underlying build system still expects that modules could be dynamically loading (since require() only imports a module when the function is executed).

In contrast, Rollup relies on ES Module support, which means it can do static analysis more easily than Webpack, though this difference is pretty small. Using Rollup, though, requires you have dependencies that support ES Modules. This can create some problems for libraries that do not support ES Modules, but thos libraries are getting rarer these days.